In this lesson you are going to learn about the modulus, which is also called the remainder after division.
Now if you're not really sure what the Modulus of a division is or what the modulo operator means then
don't worry.
It's a simple concept.
I'm going to explain it in the next slide.
Also in this video you are going to learn one of the main applications of the modulus, which is to determine
whether a number is odd or even.
So of course the odd numbers are like 1 3 5 7.
And even numbers are like 2 4 6 and 8.
All right.
So if you would divide ten by three then you might get an answer that looks something like this.
It's 3 with a remainder of 1.
So 3 is for...
we could call this integer division.
So 3 goes into 10 3 times -- not exactly three times, but that is the integer number of times that 3 goes
into 10.
But because 3 doesn't go into 10 exactly 3 times then we have a little bit left over and that is called
the remainder, which is also called the modulus. So the modulo operator in python I will show it to you
in a moment but basically the modulus in Python is going to be this number here -- not this number,
this is the integer division -- but instead we will get this number out of Python All right.
So let's switch to Python and I'll show you how to compute the modulus so I'm going to begin by creating
some numbers.
So a equals 10 and b equals 3.
These are of course the same numbers that I just showed in the slide so I can do regular division by
saying a divided by B.
Now in this case Python is not going to return 3 remainder 1.
Python is going to show this in decimal format up to whatever precision it has for the output.
So 3 goes into 10 3 point 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3.
Now in theory this this these 3 is go on forever.
But here python is truncating and rounding this off to 5.
Okay so this shows division and now I'm going to show you integer division. So integer division,
and here we just use the function int so the function int is going to extract an integer out of whatever
is the input.
So the input into this int function is three and one third approximately so three point three three
three.
And what Python is going to return is the number three.
So that's the integer.
Now I want to show you something else, which is how to get more information about a function.
So if you're not totally sure how this function int works, then of course you could open up a web browser
and search in Google for this function.
But there's also an easier way to do it, which is to get the help file for this function.
And the easiest way to do that is to click
so you're inside the function, so inside the parentheses here, and then you press on your keyboard shift
and then tab. And that's going to open up this little window here that tells you a little bit about the
function and you can press the plus sign and that will give you more information about it.
Sometimes you also see some examples. Now, when looking through these help files, you will often see
that there is more information than what you probably need for whatever you're looking for.
So you have to have a little bit of patience to be able to look through these help files and figure
out something that you're looking for.
All right.
So now we know how to get integer division and now what we want is the remainder.
And I'm going to open up a new cell for this. So the remainder, the modulus operator, is the percent sign.
So I'm going to type a percent B.
And now the answer is 1 and this answer is 1 because 3 goes into 10 3 times with the remainder of 1.
And that's what this is telling us.
So now I'd like to spend a moment showing you a little bit more code, which is actually mostly a review
of integrating this into some nicer printing.
So let's say... I'm going to say the division is the int of a divided by B, and then we have the remainder
and that is going to be a percent B or a modulus B.
Now I want to say print... and now basically I just want to print out this information.
I want to say three goes into 10 three times with a remainder of 1.
Okay.
Now of course this is all hard-coded for the numbers 3 and 10, which is generally not a good idea.
This is not a scalable solution.
As soon as I change one of these numbers this is going to be incorrect, but as I've mentioned before
when printing out like this I generally find it useful to print out what I want first and then I go
back and start editing.
So now I'm going to replace all these numbers with percent G.
So percent G.
Percent G.
And then another percent G here. And now percent and then parentheses and now we can figure out what
we need to replace these percent g's with. The first one is going to be B and then a.
So it's not a and then B because of the way I've written this so it's 3 is going into 10 not 10 is going
into 3.
So b comma a.
And then we have to say the number of times the integer number of times that's this variable.
divis. And then finally the remainder of the variable remainder.
So let's try this.
All right.
Three goes into 10.
Three times with the remainder of 1.
Now I'd like to test this a few more times.
I'm going to paste in these variables here.
So let's try... you know, a good idea I think is also to try three.
oops, I mean nine.
So now we should get a remainder of zero which we do.
So three goes into nine
three times with the remainder of zero. We can try, you know eleven maybe so then we get three times with
the remainder of two.
And now let's try something you know some really large number, I have no idea what this is going to be
but it turns out that this number goes into this number three hundred and eighteen times with a remainder
of thirty three thousand and twenty six. So whatever that means.
Now for the exercise of this video. This is actually a really important exercise because this shows you
what is, I think in my experience, the most important and commonly used application of the modulus operator,
which is to determine whether a number whether an integer is odd or even.
So what you want to do in this exercise is loop through integers from minus five to plus five and report
whether each number is an odd number or an even number. By the way, in case you never noticed the word
even has an even number of letters and the word odd has an odd number of letters. I'm not sure if that's
coincidence or by design.
And once you finish programming this exercise, if you like there are two optional little bonus additions
that you can do.
One is to make sure that the word number here is perfectly vertically aligned, so you can see even though
there is an extra space in here.
But I wanted that number to be aligned here.
A second optional bonus.
This one is pretty easy.
The second optional bonus which is a little bit more challenging is to figure out a way to get these
integers aligned here, independent of the minus sign. So you can see these numbers are all aligned and
the minus sign comes to the left of these numbers.
All right but this part is optional.
This is just visualization formatting.
That's not so important.
The important part is to make sure you know how to test whether a number is odd or even. So, pause the
video, switch to Python, work through this problem on your own.
And then when you're finished you can come back and watch me work through a solution.
All right.
So let's give ourselves a new cell down here. First I'm going to define a range of numbers let's call
this num.
And I'm going to say range minus five to plus six and I've mentioned this before but I'll say it again
that it can be a little bit confusing because the number that you want Python to stop counting is actually
one less than the second input into the range function.
So now we need a for loop to loop over all of these numbers. So say four and I'll just call this I for
simplicity for nums.
Don't forget the all important colon here. And then basically we want to immediately test and report.
So I'm going to say if I know how do we set this up.
So I is going to be this number in here.
We can use a division by 2.
And now the idea is that if a number is divisible by 2 with 0 remainder, then it must be an even number.
And if you divide a number by two and there is a remainder then it's going to be an odd number.
So I'm going to say if I modulo two or percent two equals zero then I have to print and then this is going
to say let's say you know three is an even number then of course I need to replace three with percent
G and then I need to say percent i.
Okay.
Now I am not yet finished with this exercise.
However, I think it's a good idea to run through this already just to check that the code works so far.
So what we should see is minus 4 2 0 2 and 4.
These are all even numbers now.
I suppose it's debatable whether 0 is an even or an odd number. It's a bit of a weird exception, but let's
ignore that for the moment.
Technically, it does fit into our criteria here, which is that 2 goes into 0 0 times with the remainder
of 0.
All right.
So so far this part is accurate.
And now we need to print out that the number is odd if it doesn't fit this criteria and so I'm going to say, else
again a colon here and then we print and then this is basically going to be really similar.
So I'm going to say percent G is an odd number and then percent I.
So we are getting that -- in fact this is now finished
the like mandatory part of the exercise. But there's still a few more things I would like to add.
So one thing is that the number doesn't line up here and that part is easy to fix.
I'm just going to add another space in here.
OK.
So now we see the number.
The word number lines up here, the word number lines up here.
And what we're missing is the alignment on the numbers over here.
Now this isn't really wrong the way that it's printed out, because python is aligning everything to the
first character, which is a minus sign here.
And the actual number here.
But I think it would look nicer if we could align this according to the integer.
And so basically what we need to do is add a space onto these positive numbers or at least these non
negative numbers.
Now there's a couple of ways you could have solved that. The way that I'm going to solve this is by creating
something called firstchar.
Let's create a new variable called firstchar and I'll set it equal to a space.
So it's just going to be a space in here like this.
And now I want to add this firstchar in here before this number.
Now this is a string.
This is not an integer.
This is not a number.
So when I add firstchar in here that's actually not going to be percent G,
It's going to be percent s. So percent G is for printing out numbers present.
S is for printing out strings.
And so I'll put that here as well.
And now we need to have two options in here, two replacements. So I need to add parentheses here so it
is going to say firstchar and then I add another closing parenthesis here.
Okay.
Now without replacing that here, I'm just going to run this and see what the error is. Sometimes
it's interesting, when you know that there is a problem with the code, just to run it anyway and see what
the error message looks like.
So this error message says not enough arguments for a format string.
So here we say we want a string format and there are not enough arguments.
That's referring to this fact here we're missing something here.
So now I'm also going to try firstchar.
So it looks like this but there's no parentheses around it.
And we still get an error so we need to add parentheses in here like this.
OK.
But in fact we haven't really solve the problem.
All we've done is put a space in front of everything.
So what we need to do is say that the first character should be a space only if the number is greater
than zero.
So now I'm going to say if I is greater than zero then we say that firstchar gets replaced with empty.
OK.
So let's see how this looks.
Mm hmm.
And now it actually got worse.
Now these negative numbers are offset even further to the right.
So let's think about what I did wrong here.
I hope you guessed it.
I actually should have said less than zero and not greater than zero.
So by default in the beginning of each iteration inside this loop, this variable firstchar gets
set to a space.
And then if this number in this range is less than zero, then I replace this variable firstchar with
empty. You can see there's nothing in between these single quotes here.
All right.
And now we have completely solved this exercise. So I hope you enjoyed this video. You learned about the
modulus, which is the remainder after division, you learned how to test whether a number is odd or even
using the modulo operator,
and I also walked you through a little bit of kind of real time programming and problem solving, that
is to say I made some errors while programming and then I figured out how to debug those errors and
how to fix them.